Akkadian literature is the ancient literature written in the Akkadian language (Assyrian and Babylonian dialects) written in Mesopotamia (Assyria and Babylonia) during the period spanning the Middle Bronze Age to the Iron Age (roughly the 23rd to 6th centuries BC).
Drawing on the traditions of Sumerian literature, the Babylonians compiled a substantial textual tradition of mythological narrative, legal texts, scientific works, letters and other literary forms.



Most of what we have from the Babylonians was inscribed in cuneiform with a metal stylus on tablets of clay, called laterculae coctiles by Pliny the Elder; papyrus seems to have been also employed, but it has perished.
There were libraries in most towns and temples; an old Sumerian proverb averred that "he who would excel in the school of the scribes must rise with the dawn." Women as well as men learned to read and write, and in Semitic times, this involved a knowledge of the extinct Sumerian language, and a complicated and extensive syllabary. The Babylonians' very advanced systems of writing, science and mathematics contributed greatly to their literary output.



A considerable amount of Babylonian literature was translated from Sumerian originals, and the language of religion and law long continued to be the old agglutinative language of Sumer. Vocabularies, grammars, and interlinear translations were compiled for the use of students, as well as commentaries on the older texts and explanations of obscure words and phrases. The characters of the syllabary were all arranged and named, and elaborate lists of them were drawn up.
Assyrian culture and literature came from Babylonia, but even here there was a difference between the two countries. There was little in Assyrian literature that was original, and education, general in Babylonia, was mostly restricted to a single class in the northern kingdom. In Babylonia, it was of very old standing. Under the second Assyrian empire, when Nineveh had become a great centre of trade, Aramaic   the language of commerce and diplomacy   was added to the number of subjects that the educated class was required to learn.
Under the Seleucids, Greek was introduced into Babylon, and fragments of tablets have been found with Sumerian and Assyrian (i.e. Semitic Babylonian) words transcribed into Greek letters.



According to A. Leo Oppenheim, the corpus of cuneiform literature amounted to around 1,500 texts at any one time or place, approximately half of which, at least from the first millennium, is extant in fragmentary form, and the most common genres included (in order of predominance) are omen texts, lexical lists, ritual incantations, cathartic and apotropaic conjurations, historical and mythological epics, fables and proverbs.



The Assyrian dialect of Akkadian is particularly rich in royal inscriptions from the end of the 14th century BC onward, for example the epics of Adad-n r r , Tukulti-Ninurta, and  ulm nu-a ar du III and the annals which catalogued the campaigns of the neo-Assyrian monarchs. The earliest historical royal epic is, however, that of Zimri-Lim (ca. 1710 1698 BC short) of Mari. Similar literature of the middle Babylonian period is rather poorly preserved with a fragmentary epic of the Kassite period, that of Adad- uma-u ur and of Nab -kudurr -u ur I and Marduk.
The chronicle traditional is first attested in the compositions of the early Iron Age which hark back to earlier times, such as the Chronicle of Early Kings, the Dynastic Chronicle, Chronicle P and the Assyrian Synchronistic History. A series of fifteen neo to late Babylonian Chronicles have been recovered which narrate the period spanning Nab -nasir (747 734 BC) to Seleucus III Ceraunus (243 223 BC) and were derived from the political events described in Babylonian astronomical diaries.



Exemplars of comical texts span the genres of burlesque to satire and include humorous love poems and riddles.  At the cleaners  is a tale of the dispute between an insolent scrubber and his client, a  sophomoric fop  who lectures the cleaner in ridiculous detail on how to launder his clothes, driving the exasperated cleaner to suggest that he lose no time in taking it to the river and doing it himself. The Dialogue of Pessimism was seen as a saturnalia by B hl, where master and servant switch roles, and as a burlesque by Speiser, where a fatuous master mouthes clich s and a servant echoes him. Lambert considered it a musing of a mercurial adolescent with suicidal tendencies.
The Aluzinnu ( trickster,  a jester, clown or buffoon) text, extant in five fragments from the neo-Assyrian period concerns an individual, d bibu,  kil kar i,  character assassin,  who made a living entertaining others with parodies, mimicry, and scatological songs. The Poor Man of Nippur provides a subversive narrative of the triumph of the underdog over his superior while Ninurta-P qid t's Dog Bite is a school text of a slapstick nature.



The earliest Akkadian laws are the  Old Assyrian Laws  relating to the conduct of the commercial court of a trading colony in Anatolia, ca. 1900 BC. The Laws of Eshnunna were a collection of sixty laws named for the city of its provenance and dating to around 1770 BC. The Code of  ammu-rapi, ca. 1750 BC, was the longest of the Mesopotamian legal collections, extending to nearly three hundred individual laws and accompanied by a lengthy prologue and epilogue. The edict of Ammi-Saduqa, ca. 1646 BC, was the last issued by one of  ammu-rapi s successors.
The Middle Assyrian Laws date to the fourteenth century BC, over a hundred laws are extant from Assur. The Middle Assyrian Palace Decrees, known as the  Harem Edicts,  from the reigns of A ur-uballi  I, ca. 1360 BC, to Tukult -apil-E arra I, ca 1076 BC, concern aspects of courtly etiquette and the severe penalties (flagellation, mutilation and execution) for flouting them. The Neo-Babylonian Laws number just fifteen, ca. 700 BC, probably from Sippar.



One of the most famous of these was the Epic of Gilgamesh, which first appears in Akkadian during the Old Babylonian period as a circa 1,000 line epic known by its incipit,  tur eli  arr ,  Surpassing all other kings,  which incorporated some of the stories from the five earlier Sumerian Gilgamesh tales. A plethora of mid to late second millennium versions give witness to its popularity. The standard Babylonian version,  a naqba  meru,  He who saw the deep,  contains up to 3,000 lines on eleven tablets and a prose meditation on the fate of man on the twelfth which was virtually a word-for-word translation of the Sumerian  Bilgames and the Netherworld.  It is extant in 73 copies and was credited to a certain S n-l qi-unninni and arranged upon an astronomical principle. Each division contains the story of a single adventure in the career of Gilgamesh, king of Uruk. The whole story is a composite product, and it is probable that some of the stories are artificially attached to the central figure.
Another epic was that of the "Creation" En ma Eli , whose object was to glorify Bel-Marduk by describing his contest with Tiamat, the dragon of chaos. In the first book, an account is given of the creation of the world from the primeval deep, and the birth of the gods of light. Then comes the story of the struggle between the gods of light and the powers of darkness, and the final victory of Marduk, who clove Tiamat asunder, forming the heaven from half of her body and the earth from the other. Marduk next arranged the stars in order, along with the sun and moon, and gave them laws they were never to transgress. After this, the plants and animals were created, and finally man. Marduk here takes the place of Ea, who appears as the creator in the older legends, and is said to have fashioned man from clay.
The legend of Adapa, the first man   a portion of which was found in the record-office of the Egyptian king Akhenaton at Tell-el-Amarna   explains the origin of death. Adapa, while fishing, had broken the wings of the south wind, and was accordingly summoned before the tribunal of Anu in heaven. Ea counselled him not to eat or drink anything there. He followed this advice, and thus refused the food that would have made him and his descendants immortal.
Among the other legends of Babylonia may be mentioned those of Namtar, the plague-demon; of Erra, the pestilence; of Etana and of Anzu. Hades, the abode of Ereshkigal or Allatu, had been entered by Nergal, who, angered by a message sent to her by the gods of the upper world, ordered Namtar to strike off her head. She, however, declared that she would submit to any conditions imposed on her, and would give Nergal the sovereignty of the earth. Nergal accordingly relented, and Allatu became the queen of the infernal world. Etana conspired with the eagle to fly to the highest heaven. The first gate, that of Anu, was successfully reached; but in ascending still farther to the gate of Ishtar, the strength of the eagle gave way, and Etanna was dashed to the ground. As for the storm-god Anzu, we are told that he stole the tablets of destiny, and therewith the prerogatives of Enlil. God after god was ordered to pursue him and recover them, but it would seem that it was only by a stratagem that they were finally regained.



The magnitude of omen literature within the Akkadian corpus is one of the peculiar distinguishing features of this language s legacy. According to Oppenheim, 30% of all documents of this tradition are of this genre. Exemplars of omen text appear during the earliest periods of Akkadian literature but come to their maturity early in the first millennium with the formation of canonical versions. Notable amongst these is the Enuma Anu Enlil (astrological omens),  umma  lu (terrestrial omens),  umma izbu (anomalous births), Alamdimm  (physiognomic omens), and I kar Zaq qu (dream omens). It is amongst this genre, also, that the Sakikk  (SA.GIG)  Diagnostic Handbook  belongs.
The practice of extispicy, divination through the entrails of animals, was perfected into a science over the millennia by the Babylonians and supporting texts were eventually gathered into a monumental handbook, the B r tu, extending over a hundred tablets and divided into ten chapters. Divination, however, extended into other fields with, for example, the old Babylonian libanomancy texts, concerning interpreting portents from incense smoke, being one and B l-nadin- umi s omen text on the flight paths of birds, composed during the reign of Kassite king Meli- ipak, being another exemplar.
Incantations form an important part of this literary heritage, covering a range of rituals from the sacred, Maql , "burning" to counter witchcraft,  urpu,  incineration  to counter curses, Namburbi, to preempt inauspicious omens, Utukk  Lemn tu (actually bilingual), to exorcise  Evil Demons,  and B t rimki, or  bath house,  the purification and substitution ceremony, to the mundane,  .zi.ga,  the rising of the heart,  potency spells, and Zu-buru-dabbeda,  to seize the  locust tooth ,  a compendium of incantations against field pests.



A particularly rich genre of Akkadian texts was that represented by the moniker of  wisdom literature,  although there are differences in opinion concerning which works qualify for inclusion. One of the earliest exemplars was the Dialogue between a Man and His God from the late Old Babylonian period. Perhaps the most notable were the Poem of the Righteous Sufferer (Ludlul b l n meqi) and the Babylonian Theodicy. Included in this group are a number of fables or contest literature, in varying states of preservation, such as the Tamarisk and the Palm, the Fable of the Willow, Nisaba and Wheat (kibtu), the Ox and the Horse (Inum I tar  urbutum,  When exalted Ishtar ), the Fable of the Fox, and the Fable of the Riding-donkey.
W. G. Lambert and others include several popular sayings, and proverbs (both bilingual and Babylonian) together with the Lament of a Sufferer with a Prayer to Marduk, Counsels of Wisdom, Counsels of a Pessimist, and Advice to a Prince in this genre.  A Dialogue between  p -am li and His Father  ( im  milka) is a piece of wisdom literature in the manner of a deathbed debate from the Akkadian hinterland. There are also Akkadian translations of earlier Sumerian works such as the Instructions of Shuruppak which are often considered belonging to this tradition.



Besides the purely literary works, there were others of varied nature, including collections of letters, partly official, partly private. Among them the most interesting are the letters of Hammurabi, which have been edited by Leonard William King.



The following gives the better-known extant works, excluding lexical and synonym lists.
Abnu  ikin u   Adad-n r r  I Epic   Adad- uma-u ur Epic   Adapa and Enmerkar   Advice to a prince   Agushaya Hymn   Alamdimm    Aluzinnu text   Ardat-lili   Asakk  mar tu   A ipus' Almanac (or Handbook)   At the cleaners   Atra- as s   Autobiography of Adad-gupp    Autobiography of Kurigalzu   Autobiography of Marduk   Babylonian Almanac   Babylonian King List   Babylonian Theodicy   B r tu   Birth legend of Sargon   B t m seri   B t rimki   B t sal  m    Chronicle of Early Kings   Chronicle of the Market Prices   Chronicle of reign of  ulgi   Chronicle P   Code of Hammurabi   Consecration of a priest   Counsels of a Pessimist   Counsels of Wisdom   Crimes and Sacrileges of Nabu- uma-i kun   Cuthean Legend of Naram-Sin   Dialogue between a Man and His God   Dialogue of Pessimism   Dingir. .dib.ba   Dream of Kurigalzu   Dynastic Chronicle   Dynastic Prophecy   Dynasty of Dunnum (Harab Myth)   Eclectic Chronicle   Edict of Ammi-Saduqa   Egalkura spells   Elegies Mourning the Death of Tammuz   Enlil and Sud   Enuma Anu Enlil   En ma Eli    Epic of Anzu   Epic of Gilgame    Epic of the Kassite period   Epic of Nab -kudurr -u ur   Epic of the plague-god Erra (Erra and I um)   Etana   Fable of the Fox   Fable of the Riding-donkey   Fable of the Willow   Girra and Elamatum   Harem Edicts   Hemerology for Nazi-Marutta     ulbazizi   Inana's Ascent   Iqqur Ipu    I kar Zaq qu   I tar s hell ride   Kadibbidu   Kal tu catalogue   KAR 6   Katadugg    Kedor-laomer texts   Kettledrum rituals   King of battle   Ki'utu   Labbu myth   Lama tu   Lament of a Sufferer with a Prayer to Marduk   Laws of Eshnunna   Lip ur litanies   Ludlul b l n meqi   Maql    Marduk's Address to the Demons   Marduk Prophecy   Middle Assyrian Laws   M s-p    Moon god and the cow   Muk l r  lemutti   MUL.APIN   Mu u'u   Na'id- ihu Epic   Nabonidus Chronicle   Namburbi   Namerimburrud    Neo-Babylonian Laws   Nergal and Ere kigal   New year ritual-Akitu procession   Nigdimdimm    Ninurta-P qid t's Dog Bite   Nisaba and Wheat   Ox and the Horse   Pazuzu   Poor Man of Nippur   Prophecy A   Qut ru   Rab t   Recipes against Anta ubba   Religious Chronicle   Royal inscription of Simbar- ipak   Sag-gig-ga-me  (Muru  qaqqadi)   Sakikk    Salm nu-a ar du III Epic   Synchronistic History    ru  ikin u    ammu  ikin u    ar P     .zi.ga    p lemutti    u'ila    ulgi Prophecy    umma  lu    umma am lu ka ip    umma immeru    umma Izbu    umma liptu    umma sinni tu qaqqada rab t    urpu   T kultu   Tamarisk and the Palm   Tam tu texts   Ta ritu hemerology   Tukulti-Ninurta Epic   Tu-ra k lib-ba   The therapeutic series UGU ( umma am lu mu a u umma uk l)   Uruhulake of Gula   Uruk King List   Uruk Prophecy   U burruda   Utukk  Lemn tu   Verse Account of Nabonidus   Vision of the Netherworld   Walker Chronicle   Weidner Chronicle   Zimri-Lim Epic   Zi-p  incantations   Zisurr  (Sag-ba Sag-ba)   Zu-buru-dabbeda




Ancient literature



 This article incorporates text from a publication now in the public domain: Chisholm, Hugh, ed. (1911). "Babylonia and Assyria". Encyclop dia Britannica 3 (11th ed.). Cambridge University Press. pp. 99 112.