The American Society for Cell Biology (ASCB) is a professional society that was founded in 1960.
Its mission statement says:

ASCB is an inclusive community of biologists studying the cell, the fundamental unit of life. We are dedicated to advancing scientific discovery, advocating sound research policies, improving education, promoting professional development, and increasing diversity in the workforce.



On 6 April 1959 the United States National Academy of Sciences passed a resolution for the establishment of a "national society of cell biology to act as a national representative to the International Society for Cell Biology".
By 1963, the membership consisted of 9,000 scientists. In 2008 it was reported that ASCB had 11,000 members worldwide.



Print publications:
Molecular Biology of the Cell: An online journal of scholarly research reports and essays published 24 times a year.
CBE- Life Sciences Education: An online peer-reviewed journal of life science education research and evidence-based practice.
ASCB Newsletter: The ASCB's monthly newsletter updating members and policymakers on issues, public policy, society programs and events, grants, career advice, and more.
Online publication:
The ASCB Post: The latest in science news, insights, and blogs.



Typically held within the first two weeks of December, the ASCB's annual meeting brings together scientists in the field of cell biology to highlight the latest research, techniques, products, and services, providing a venue for networking and career advice, offering research-tested educational approaches for high school teachers and professors who teach undergraduates, and to spur future discovery and collaboration. The ASCB also presents awards, poster sessions (where students, postdoctoral fellows, and independent scientists present their research and receive feedback), scientific sessions (symposia, minisymposia, working groups, workshops, translational sessions, special interest subgroups, award lectures, and exhibits). Science discussion tables offer opportunities to discuss scientific topics with expert scientists, and the career discussion roundtables offer a variety of career topic-themed tables addressed with expert facilitators. In addition, special sessions focus on advocacy, media and public outreach, and special issues of interest to women, minorities, gay, lesbian, and transgender students/scientists, the media, etc.



E.B. Wilson Medal
Keith R. Porter Lecture
WICB Junior and Senior Awards
E.E. Just Lecture
MAC Poster Award
MBC Paper of the Year
Young UK Cell Biologist
Bruce Alberts Award for Excellence in Science Education
Early Career Life Scientist Award
Merton Bernfield Memorial Award
Norton B. Gilula Award
$5,000 Kaluza Prize
ASCB Public Service Award



The following people have been president of the ASCB:



The Education Committee focuses on promoting biology education, science literacy, and career development in biology-related fields, honoring educators Bruce Alberts Award for Excellence in Science Education, educating educators through sessions at the ASCB Annual Meeting including the Education Initiative Forum, Education Minisymposium, Education workshop on undergraduate teaching, K 12 Science Education (for local high school students and teachers), and developing careers.
The Finance And Audit Committee, chaired by the treasurer, is responsible for evaluating the financial status of the Society, reviewing expenditures and recommending the annual budgets, reserve funds, and investments. The committee consists of three or more members of the Society and two ex officio members - the president and president-elect.
The major objectives of the International Affairs Committee are to broaden the base of the society's international efforts by working with national cell biology societies and coordinating international activities; facilitating exchange between U.S. and international scientists; increasing cell biology training and capacity worldwide; and increasing international membership and satisfaction in the ASCB.
The Membership Committee, chaired by the secretary, reviews and recommends policies related to membership retention and growth.
The Minorities Affairs Committee seeks to significantly support underrepresented minority scientists in all stages of their education and career.
The Program Committee develops the scientific program for the annual meeting, which is generally held in late Fall/early Winter.
The Public Information Committee promotes education of the lay public in cell biology, directly and through the media.
The Public Policy Committee regularly educates the United States Congress and the administration about the importance of basic biomedical funding and biomedical policy.
The Committee for Postdocs and Students represents young scientists. They are dedicated to providing a forum for student and postdoc members to identify and address topics that are essential to their success. They strive to uphold the values and advance the goals of ASCB by promoting the active participation of students and postdocs in the scientific community and maximizing their effectiveness.
The major objective of the Women in Cell Biology Committee is to provide opportunities and information useful to women  and men in developing their careers in cell biology. The committee also provides career development advice of value to all basic biomedical scientists.
The Cell: An Image Library is a comprehensive, easily accessible, public resource database of images, videos, and animations of cells from a variety of organisms, showcasing as well cell components and functions. The database will advance research on cellular activity with the ultimate goal of improving human health.






Official website
ASCB Education: iBiology - free online biology lectures
The ASCB Post