Cell Signaling Technology, Inc. (CST) is a private company that develops and produces antibodies, ELISA kits, ChIP kits, proteomic kits, and other related regents used to study the cell signaling pathways that impact human health. CST maintains an in-house research program, particularly in the area of cancer research, and has published scientific papers in many peer-reviewed journals.



Cell Signaling Technology, Inc. (CST) was founded in 1999 by scientists in the Cell Signaling group at New England Biolabs (NEB).
Originally housed in the Cummings Center (Beverly, Massachusetts), CST moved to its current United States headquarters located at the former King s Grant Inn (Danvers, Massachusetts) in late 2005. Following extensive renovation, the U.S. Green Building Council has certified the current headquarters as a LEED (Leadership in Energy and Environmental Design) certified facility in 2007. In 2008 and 2009, CST expanded its overseas operations, establishing subsidiary offices in the People s Republic of China, Japan, and the Netherlands.
In 2013, CST moved its production group into an ISO9001 certified facility in Beverly, Massachusetts. The company has the capabilities to manufacture cGMP-grade antibodies.
Cell Signaling Technology, Inc. (CST) was named as one of the  Top 100 Places to Work  in a 2009-2013 survey published by the Boston Globe.



In addition to product development and production, CST is also involved in the development of new technologies for signaling analysis as well as mechanistic cell biology research, particularly in the field of cancer research. CST scientists publish their findings in peer-reviewed journals, including Nature Cell Biology, Cell, Molecular and Cellular Biology, and Journal of Biological Chemistry.
CST maintains a curated, web-based bioinformatics resource known as PhosphoSitePlus, which details protein phosphorylation in human, mouse and rat. Curated information also includes other post-translational modifications, such as protein acetylation, methylation and ubiquitinylation. This freely accessible, online resource is funded in part through support from the NIH.






Cell Signaling Technology, Inc. web site
Cell Signaling Technology (China) Limited web site
Cell Signaling Technology Europe, B.V. web site
Cell Signaling Technology Japan, K.K. web site
PhosphoSitePlus web site