ActiveX is a deprecated software framework created by Microsoft that adapts its earlier Component Object Model (COM) and Object Linking and Embedding (OLE) technologies for content downloaded from a network, particularly in the context of the World Wide Web. It was introduced in 1996 and is commonly used in its Windows operating system. In principle it is not dependent on Microsoft Windows, but in practice, most ActiveX controls require either Microsoft Windows or a Windows emulator. Most also require the client to be running on Intel x86 hardware, because they contain compiled code.
Many Microsoft Windows applications   including many of those from Microsoft itself, such as Internet Explorer, Microsoft Office, Microsoft Visual Studio, and Windows Media Player   use ActiveX controls to build their feature-set and also encapsulate their own functionality as ActiveX controls which can then be embedded into other applications. Internet Explorer also allows the embedding of ActiveX controls in web pages.
However, ActiveX will not work on all platforms, so using ActiveX controls to implement essential functionality of a web page restricts its usefulness.
Countries like South Korea have started to remove this technology from their public websites.
In 2015, Microsoft Edge, the replacement for Internet Explorer, dropped ActiveX support, marking the end of the technology.



Faced with the complexity of OLE 2.0 and with poor support for COM in MFC, Microsoft simplified the specification and rebranded the technology as ActiveX in 1996. Even after simplification, users still required controls to implement about six core interfaces. In response to this complexity, Microsoft produced wizards, ATL base classes, macros and C++ language extensions to make it simpler to write controls.
Starting with Internet Explorer 3.0 (1996), Microsoft added support to host ActiveX controls within HTML content. If the browser encountered a page specifying an ActiveX control via an OBJECT tag, it would automatically download and install the control with little or no user intervention. This made the web "richer" but provoked objections (since such controls, in practice, ran only on Windows, and separate controls were required for each supported platform: one for Windows 3.1/Windows NT 3.51, one for Windows NT/95, and one for Macintosh F68K/PowerPC.) and security risks (especially given the lack of user intervention). Microsoft subsequently introduced security measures to make browsing including ActiveX safer.
For example:
digital signing of installation packages (Cabinet files and executables)
controls must explicitly declare themselves safe for scripting
increasingly stringent default security settings
Internet Explorer maintains a blacklist of bad controls
On 17 October 1996, Microsoft announced availability of the beta release of the Microsoft ActiveX Software Development Kit (SDK) for the Macintosh.
Shortly thereafter, Microsoft made ActiveX open source. Documentation for ActiveX core technology resides at The Open Group and may be downloaded for free.
In 2015, Microsoft announced that their new web browser and Internet Explorer replacement, Microsoft Edge, will not support ActiveX, which they described as a "legacy technology".



It may not always be possible to use Internet Explorer to execute ActiveX content (e.g. on a Wine installation), nor may a user want to.
FF ActiveX Host can run ActiveX controls in Mozilla Firefox for Windows.
Mozilla ActiveX Control was last updated in late 2005, and runs in Firefox 1.5.
MediaWrap for Firefox was last updated on 12 June 2008, and will run in Firefox 1.5 to 3.5.*.



Microsoft has developed a large number of products and software platforms using ActiveX objects. They are still used (e.g., websites still use ASP.):
Active Messaging, later renamed Collaboration Data Objects
Active Scripting, a technology for scripting ActiveX objects
Active Server Pages (ASP)
ActiveMovie, later renamed DirectShow
ActiveX Data Objects (ADO)
ActiveX Streaming Format (ASF), renamed Advanced Streaming Format, then to Advanced Systems Format



Active Setup
Active Template Library (ATL)
Flex
Google Native Client, an alternative development from Google
IUnknown interface
Java Beans
NPAPI, an alternative interface for web-browser plugins
OLE Automation
Silverlight
Windows DNA






Official website
Activating ActiveX Controls