Adam Fletcher is an advocate, author, motivational speaker, and educator focused on youth voice and student engagement, recognized for founding The Freechild Project. His work centers on youth studies, critical thinking and the development of democratic society, and has been acknowledged as "perhaps the best spokesman for the philosophical basis of community youth development". Action for Healthy Kids named him a "Healthy Schools Hero" in 2010.
Fletcher was a youth worker in several nonprofit organizations and in government agencies for more than a decade. He completed his undergraduate degree in critical pedagogy and youth studies at The Evergreen State College, and conducted graduate studies at the University of Washington in educational leadership and policy studies.
For the last decade Fletcher has worked with educators, youth workers and government administrators around the world on democratizing educational practice and policy in schools and youth programs. He also serves as a director and advisor to several organizations including the National Youth Rights Association and others, and is a contributing editor to the Review of Education, Pedagogy and Cultural Studies, published by Taylor and Francis. He has written more than 50 publications related to youth work, school reform, and social change.



Fletcher, A. (2013) Ending Discrimination Against Young People. Olympia, WA: CommonAction Books.
Fletcher, A. (2013) The Guide to Student Voice. Olympia, WA: CommonAction Books.
Fletcher, A. (2013) The Freechild Project Guide to Youth-Driven Programming. Olympia, WA: CommonAction Books.
Fletcher, A. (2009) Call to Action Toolkit. Chicago, IL: National PTA.
Fletcher, A. "The Architecture of Ownership", Educational Leadership. 66, 3. November 2008. Retrieved 11/10/2008.
Fletcher, A. (2008) "Students as Partners in Learning: Adam Fletcher Talks about Meaningful Student Involvement", Leadership Information. Volume 7 Number 4. School Information and Research Service.
Fletcher, A. (2007) SoundOut Student Voice Curriculum. Olympia, WA: CommonAction Books.
With Sazama, J. and Young, K. (2007) 15 Points to Successfully Involving Youth on Boards. Boston, MA: Youth On Board.
Fletcher, A. (2006) Washington Youth Voice Handbook. Olympia, WA: CommonAction Books and Washington State Office of Superintendent of Public Instruction.
Fletcher, A. (2004) "The Youth Voice Movement: A Lost Dream of Yesterday or a Bold Vision for Tomorrow?" in The Generator: Journal of Service-Learning and Youth Leadership.
Fletcher, A. (2004) "Meaningful Student Involvement," in School Culture: An Introduction. Gates Foundation Small Schools Project.






Professional website