Bah '  symbols are symbols that have been used, or are used, to express identification with the Bah '  Faith. While the five-pointed star is the symbol of the religion, being used to represent the human body and Messengers of God, more common symbols include the nine-pointed star, the Greatest Name, and the Ringstone symbol, representing perfection, and the Messengers of God.




The five-pointed star, or haykal (Arabic: temple ) is the symbol of the Bah '  Faith as mentioned by Shoghi Effendi, head of the Bah '  Faith in the first half of the 20th century: "Strictly speaking the 5-pointed star is the symbol of our Faith, as used by the B b and explained by Him." The five-pointed star has been used as the outline of special letters or tablets by both the B b and Bah 'u'll h.
Haykal is a loan word from the Hebrew word h y l, which means temple and specifically Solomon's Temple in Jerusalem. In Arabic, the word also means the body or form of something, particularly the human body. In the Bah '  tradition, the haykal was established by the B b   the person who told of Bah 'u'll h's coming   who represented the haykal as a five-pointed star representing the human body as a head, two hands, and two feet. The B b wrote many letters, tablets, prayers and more in the shape of a five-pointed star, including some that included many derivatives of the word Bah  (see below).
In Bah 'u'll h's writings, specifically the S riy-i-Haykal (Tablet of the Temple), while the meaning of temple remains present, the haykal is used mainly to mean the human body, but particularly the body of the Manifestation of God   a messenger from God   and the person of Bah 'u'll h himself. In the Tablet, the haykal is also used to refer to the word of God, which is revealed by the Manifestations of God. He also says in the same Tablet:

"O Living Temple! We have, in very truth,...ordained Thee to be the emblem of My Cause betwixt the heavens and the earth..."




In Islamic belief God has 99 names, and in some Islamic traditions it is believed that there is a special hidden 100th name, which is the greatest. In Bah '  belief the Greatest Name is Bah  ( ), translated as "glory" or "splendour". Many symbols of the Bah '  Faith derive their significance from the word Bah , and it is the root word used in many other names and phrases including Bah '  (a follower of Bah '), Bah 'u'll h (Glory of God), `Abdu'l-Bah  (Servant of Glory), Y  Bah 'u'l-Abh  (O Thou Glory of the Most Glorious), and All h-u-Abh  (God is Most Glorious).
Bah 'u'll h often referred to Bah ' s in his writings as "the people of Bah ", and in addition, the B b sent a tablet to Bah 'u'll h with 360 derivatives of the word Bah . Along with daily prayers, Bah ' s are encouraged to recite the phrase "All h-u-Abh " 95 times in a form of meditation.

The symbol known as Greatest Name is an Arabic calligraphic rendering of "Y  Bah 'u'l-Abh " (      usually translated as "O Thou the Glory of the Most Glorious!"). This rendering was originally drawn by the early Bah '  calligrapher Mishk n Qalam, and later adopted by Bah ' s everywhere.
Since the symbol refers more directly to the Name of God and of the Messenger of God, than any other symbol in the Bah '  Faith, it is not generally used in a casual manner or to adorn the personal artifacts that are put to common use. The symbol can usually be seen in Bah '  homes and rings that are produced on a limited scale.




According to the Abjad system of Isopsephy, the word Bah ' has a numerical equivalence of 9, and thus there is frequent use of the number 9 in Bah '  symbols. The most commonly used symbol connected to the number 9 is the nine-pointed star; there is no particular design of the nine-pointed star that is used more often than others. While the star is not a part of the teachings of the Bah '  Faith, it is commonly used as an emblem representing "9", because of the association of number 9 with perfection, unity and Bah .
The number 9 also comes up several times in Bah '  history and teachings. On the significance of the number 9, Shoghi Effendi wrote:

"Concerning the number nine: the Bah ' s reverence this for two reasons, first because it is considered by those interested in numbers as the sign of perfection. The second consideration, which is the more important one, is that it is the numerical value of the word "Bah " 
"Besides these two significances the number nine has no other meaning. It is, however, enough to make the Bah ' s use it when an arbitrary number is to be chosen."

Its use on gravestone markers was approved by Shoghi Effendi, then head of the religion, in 1944.




The ringstone symbol was designed by `Abdu'l-Bah , Bah 'u'll h's son and successor, and as its name implies, is the most common symbol found on rings worn by Bah ' s, but it is also used on necklaces, book covers, and paintings. It consists of two stars (haykal) interspersed with a stylized Bah . The lower line is said to represent humanity and the world of creation, the upper line the world of God, and the middle line represents the special station of Manifestation of God and the world of revelation; the vertical line is the Primal Will or Holy Spirit proceeding from God through the Manifestations to humanity. The position of Manifestation of God in this symbol is said to be the linking point to God. The two stars or haykals represent Bah 'u'll h and the B b.



Bah '  cosmology
Talismans in the B b  and Bah '  Faiths






Effendi, Shoghi (1973), Directives from the Guardian, Hawaii Bah '  Publishing Trust, p. 52 
Faizi, Abu'l-Qasim (1968), Explanation of the Symbol of the Greatest Name, Bah '  Publishing Trust, PO Box No. 19, New Delhi, India 
Hornby, Helen, ed. (1983), Lights of Guidance: A Bah '  Reference File, Bah '  Publishing Trust, New Delhi, India, ISBN 81-85091-46-3 
MacEoin, Denis (1997), Hinnells, John R. (ed), ed., A New Handbook of Living Religions, Blackwell Publishers, ISBN 0-631-18275-6 
Riggs, Robert F. (1981), Apocalyspe Unsealed, New York: Philosophical Library, ISBN 0-8022-2367-2 
Taherzadeh, Adib (1984), The Revelation of Bah 'u'll h, Volume 3: 'Akka, The Early Years 1868-77, Oxford, UK: George Ronald, ISBN 0-85398-144-2 
Walbridge, John (1995), Sacred Acts, Sacred Space, Sacred Time, Oxford: George Ronald, ISBN 0-85398-406-9 



The Art of the Greatest Name
The Nine-Pointed Star, History and Symbolism - by the Universal House of Justice, 1999
Story of the Ringstone Symbol - www.spiritual-education.org
Greatest Name Song and Poem Site used with permission, a public site