Corporate services are activities that combine or consolidate certain enterprise-wide needed support services, provided based on specialized knowledge, best practices, and technology to serve internal (and sometimes external) customers and business partners.
In the United Kingdom, the public audit agencies produced a report in May 2007 called "Value for Money in public sector corporate services"
This provides performance indicators in five categories ( Finance ; Human Resources ; Information & Communication Technology ; Procurement ; Estates Management )






Business advisory service advises current and future businesses prospects of a client, with the aim of advancing their business or company. This service is used by all types of businesses and would involve examining the legal, tax, finance, market and risks factors involved to start up a business or making new changes to the business. Business advisory services are given by organisations with experience in company formation.




Company incorporation is the process of forming a company corporation officially in the country of residence. It is also possible non-residents to set up a company: see offshore company. However, laws vary in all countries. International corporate service consultants specialise in dealing with incorporation in the country in question. Once application is successful, the company will receive a certificate of incorporation. Which provides valid existence of the company under the registered name given.




A registered agent, also known as a resident agent or statutory agent, is a business or individual designated to receive service of process (SOP) when a business entity is a party in a legal action such as a lawsuit or summons. Some examples of related services include:
Compliance Services
Business Licensing
DBA Doing Business As filings.
Preparation and filing of reports that must be filed from time to time (Annual, Biennial, etc.)



Corporate services such as finance and banking, were first introduced to remove pressure from the client's organisation when dealing with complex banking and finance issues. Specialist information and tips are provided by the consultancy to manage finances appropriately, and some can set up a corporate bank account for clients. Some examples of tailored services include:
Corporate Bank Account
Offshore bank Accounts
Multi-currency Accounts
Brokerage Accounts
Private Banking
Corporate Loan Applications



Accounting and tax services are useful for companies wanting to outsource their basic work. The service an involve preparing and submitting many obligatory documents required by authorities associated with business practice. Some basic services include:
Payroll
Maintaining cash flow books
Tax registration
Tax returns
Corporation tax
Tax Planning (international)




Market research for investment alongside with risk evaluation is another corporate service designed to help clients make financial decisions. Intellectual property protection is seen as an investment, this is a service some consultancies may also advise on. Similarly, stock exchange services can bring about specialist reports on past, current and forecasted stock exchange trends, with a personalised analysis.


